# KW-Financial
Mock Financial Tracking Program created in under 15 hours
Kanishka Wijeratne
Dr. Covey
GENG 101-54
30 September 2023
				 Design Project
Introduction
	 The project that I attempted to work on was software that would keep track of someone's expenses. I wanted to create much bigger projects but they were out of scope for me to create in the period we were allotted. I have issues with spending money impulsively, so I thought that software that would easily keep track of things I spend my money on would be a challenge while still being realistic and practical. I consulted my dad who also agreed that creating a financial tracking software would be practical if it was quick to use and view. 
Problem Description
	Some people, including myself, would like to track what they are spending their money on. They might want to track it to cut expenses or have an idea of what they spend their money on. I wanted to solve this problem by creating a simple and quick software to allow a user to track their expenses. 
Constraints
	My biggest constraints were the allotted 15 hours to develop and my previous skills as a programmer. I know Python, Java, SQL, and basic web development. I needed to create a graphical user interface (GUI) in Python, Java, or html5. Besides my own constraints, I also needed to create something that would be fast and easy to run on any computer. The data stored in the program also needed to be easy to local and use while also being able to be scaled up easily if the user tracks their expenses for a long period of time. 
Review of Existing Products
	There are many financial tracking programs. They are all very similar to each other but a staple one is Mint. Comparing mine to Mints software, mine is much quicker and more secure. Mint connects to the internet and shares that information with other databases which leads to a big security risk for the user. They are at the hands of Mint to make sure that their information is secure. Min also connects to your bank account/s which means the data that they have is extremely valuable to hackers. With my software, the user is in complete control of their information because it doesn’t connect to the internet and also is only on their computer. Mint was bought by Intuit for 170 million dollars in November of 2009(Redbytes UK) while being launched in 2007. You can assume a decent chunk of that money was development. Mine software was free to develop and also only took 15 hours to create. Many of these financial tracking programs have in-app purchases while mine does not, which is a benefit to the user. 
Objectives and Approach
	My main goal is to create a program that can allow a user to input transactions, as well as their dates and types of purchases. I want the GUI to be very clear and user-friendly. I also have the data stored to be relatively simple as I am on a 15-hour budget. I also want the user to be able to see their transactions based on date and transaction type or both. My approach is to use Python to create the front end, and then develop a backend that is suited best for however, the front end grabs data because I am not familiar with front-end software development. 
Concepts with the selected concept
Because I am only familiar with SQL, HTML5, Python, and Java my concepts were all based in these languages. My first thought was to create my software in Java and connect it to an SQL database. Java is a somewhat low-level language so the software would be lighter on whatever hardware is running it. Having an SQL database would also be a very organized way of storing the data and making it very scalable. I decided against this because I would need to learn how to connect the database to Java. I would also need to learn how to create a GUI in Java. I don’t think I could’ve finished my software in 15 hours doing all of this. 
My second thought was to create a website. I quickly realized that I hadn’t ever done anything in HTML that saves data and steered away. I also thought of doing the same thing as my first idea but instead of using Java use Python. I also decided to steer away because of how much slower the program would be because it would need to connect to a separate database. That also could be a potential security issue. 
My final idea was to use Python and create a separate file on whatever computer the software is run on to store all the information. I think that with the time constraint, I wouldn’t be able to fully finish my software within 15 hours if I connected Python to a SQL database. The software is also very light so not using a lower-level language like Java will be okay. I also prefer to use Python. I find it easier to work in. I am not super familiar with SQL and I think that it was a good choice with the time constraint and my skills in Python.
Iterations
	Overall I didn’t have a different iteration of the program, but testing what was working and not working. I was having trouble finding a good way to organize what different button functions would do. I first started by creating different functions for specific things that needed to be done to a user-inputted variable. 
An example would be this function. It checks to see if the user inputted a float data type. This was an outside function but when you want to store a variable that isn’t global you can only access it within the function. I needed to add it into a bigger function to access variables to store them.
When it is added to the whole function I was able to store the variables. 
	I also had different ideas of storing the variables. My first idea was to create global variables to store the transaction amount, date, and transaction type. Those would then be stored in a list to be put into storage. It worked but when a new transaction would happen it would store every other transaction into that list too.
[[12.00, “4/16/2005”, “Utilities”]]
[[12.00, “4/16/2005”, “Utilities”],[[12.00, “4/16/2005”, “Utilities”],[5.00, 4/17/2005,”Transport”]]]
I realized that it would store EVERY transaction, not just the information of one transaction. I then decided to create a variable called full_transaction[] that would get appended immediately after a variable is verified as being good and the user will verify that they want to store it. This allowed me to have the user verify the transaction amount, date, and type. Then they can store it. 											
This was also a lot easier to store in my information file. Once the user verified their transaction it would be stored as one line in the information file.
At this point, I haven’t even created a way for the user to view their transactions. There weren't any different iterations of this because I had kept in mind how I was going to read the file and already created a function to read each transaction/ each line of the information file. 
I essentially was reversing the process of adding and sending the result to another list to be shown to the user. I needed to add it to another list so Python could filter out what the user wanted. When it is stored in the information file it was stored as a string and needed to be changed back into different types of values. 
I found that it was much simpler to add a total amount to the selected amount of transactions. I wanted to know the total amount that was spent and adding them all up in your head is very tedious and non-user friendly. I assume most people also want to see how much they spend in a particular amount of time too. This is a relatively simple change but I thought that it was a very good change that I oversaw to add until I was able to test out my software. 
What I learned(Increase in Knowledge)
I learned a lot about how to store information. When I decided to use a file and read each line I learned how to grab string lines from a file and turn them into a numerical variable or date variable. I also learned a lot about GUI interfaces. Mine was very simple but I learned how to have a user input information and check to see if it's valid and adjust the GUI accordingly. That was something I had never done before and it was a very big part of completing this project. I found it tedious but it was very cool to be able to put it all together and work. I learned how to plan out a bigger coding project also. I have taken a lot of programming classes in high school but I haven’t worked on a big project like this ever. I decided to take the time to plan everything out and it worked very well for me. I never felt rushed and when it did come to actually programming it was much smoother than it would have been if I didn’t plan so much.
What would I do differently?
	If I had another chance to do this project again I would change a few things. I created some backend while creating the front end and I would not do that again. Looking back it added much more time spent programming because I would get out of the flow of creating the front end. I would use that extra time to create a better-looking GUI. Mine is very plain and practical but it is not very appealing to look at. I also would’ve tried to create this in Java. I am not as comfortable with Java and it would have been extra challenging but it would have given me even more skills in Java than what I learned in Python. I would also have tried to give myself extra time to finish it to my liking. If I had given myself one more week I think I would be able to polish up the code to something very readable. The current code is reasonably easy to follow but I would like to go back and add more comments so others could very easily comprehend what is going on even if they don't understand Python's syntax.
Manufacturing and Distribution issues
This software does not involve any physical manufacturing, eliminating potential production issues. Its distribution would rely on people knowing about the software. It would cost money to host a website where people can go to download the software if it was mass-produced. The way you could make the software free would be to place advertisements on the software or website it is on. I don’t think that anyone would pay for this software but they would pay to remove ads on it. I do think that it would be hard to advertise this software because I would be competing with companies that spend millions of dollars in development. They have the edge in creating more complex software because they aren’t at a time limit and have lots of money to spend on development. I would be able to market it as a no-nonsense software for those who are budget-conscious.  
Marketing approach
	As said before I would market this as a no-nonsense software. I would market it as a utilitarian software that is very secure because it does not connect to the internet at all. I would also market this software as a program that can run extremely fast on any modern computer. I would buy Google ads as they are a good way to have advertisements targeted toward certain individuals. I would have ads on the website to download the software and advertisements in the software. I would also have an option to spend five dollars for no advertisements.
Topics From This Class and Two Other Sources
	The biggest topic I used in this class is time management. I worked on small parts of the code each day. I would find one part I was trying to create, change, or fix and do that one thing every day. It made me feel accomplished each day and I never felt rushed or a need to cram everything into a few days. I was able to fully understand each part of my code and how it is a piece of the puzzle. It made it easier to change code when you fully understand it and aren’t just copying code from online forums. That is not to say that I didn’t use online sources. In my Introduction to Java class, my professor instructed us to use online resources to finish homework. That skill of looking up information on how to do something was very useful for this project. I needed to fully understand things that I hadn’t done before. Using sites like W3 schools, GeeksforGeeks, and Stackoverflow allowed me to research how to do things that were needed in my program. For example, I completely learned how to make the GUI in this software from sites like those. I also learned how to balance responsibilities. With this project being longer I had to tackle other small assignments from other classes. I found that breaking this project up made it feel like many “small” assignments. I would then prioritize assignments from other classes based on the size and timespan. They were usually done before working on this project but I always tried to do this project when I could. 
Relationship between this project and my major
	I am majoring in software engineering. This project was solely programming which is a lot of software engineering. It is directly related to what I am studying and I found it very satisfying. I had to use problem-solving skills, time management, research skills, and creativity. This is what I like about software engineering. I have some level of creativity and I get to solve problems on a computer. 
Conclusion
This project has taught and strengthened a lot of my skills. I had to use time management, responsibility balancing, and problem-solving. I created a basic financial tracking software so a user could track their expenses and see them by transaction type and when they happened. This project has shown me that I picked the right major. It allowed me to get a glimpse into what I will be doing in the future and I am thoroughly excited to tackle even more complex and bigger projects.	
References
●	Quicken. "Budget Categories." Quicken, https://www.quicken.com/blog/budget-categories/.
●	Forbes. "Best Budgeting Apps." Forbes Advisor, https://www.forbes.com/advisor/banking/best-budgeting-apps/.
●	You Need A Budget (YNAB). "YNAB's Price Change 2021." YNAB, https://www.ynab.com/price-change-2021/#:~:text=YNAB's%20subscription%20price%20is%20%2414.99,effect%20on%20December%201%2C%202021
●	Top Digital Agency. "How Much Does It Cost to Develop an App Like Mint?" Top Digital Agency, https://topdigital.agency/how-much-does-it-cost-to-develop-an-app-like-mint/.
●	W3Schools
https://www.w3schools.com/
●	geeksforgeeks
https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/


